# Dr.Semmelweis_and_Handwashing

This study focuses on the research of Dr. Ignaz Semmelweis, a Hungarian physician born in 1818 and active at the General Hospital in Vienna, regarding puerperal fever (a deadly disease affecting women who have just given birth). In the early 1840s at the General Hospital in Vienna, up to 10% of women giving birth died due to this illness. Dr. Semmelweis's research allowed him to identify the origin of the disease. The study encompassed data from the two clinics he had access to, where the data showed a higher death rate in clinic 1 compared to clinic 2. This was attributed to the fact that a greater proportion of students were assigned to clinic 1, and they also spent time in autopsy rooms.

After the implementation of mandatory handwashing, as shown in the presented graphs, a clear decrease in deaths is evident, reducing the death rate by around 8 percentage points, from an average of 10% to just 2%. So, handwashing reduced the proportion of deaths by between 6.7 and 10 percentage points, according to a 95% confidence interval. All in all, it would seem that Semmelweis had solid evidence that handwashing was a simple but highly effective procedure that could save many lives.

The tragedy is that, despite the evidence, Semmelweis' theory — that childbed fever was caused by some "substance" (what we today know as bacteria) from autopsy room corpses — was ridiculed by contemporary scientists. The medical community largely rejected his discovery and in 1849 he was forced to leave the Vienna General Hospital for good.

One reason for this was that statistics and statistical arguments were uncommon in medical science in the 1800s. Semmelweis only published his data as long tables of raw data, but he didn't show any graphs nor confidence intervals. If he would have had access to the analysis we've just put together he might have been more successful in getting the Viennese doctors to wash their hands.
